---
title: America’s Standardized-Testing Giants Are Losing Money Fast
image:
  path: "/assets/media/sat.webp"
  caption: U.S. Navy Photographer's Mate 3rd Class Jason T. Poplin via Wikipedia Commons
  sourceurl: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:US_Navy_050223-N-5821P-054_Seaman_Chanthorn_Peou_of_San_Diego,_Calif.,_takes_his_Scholastic_Aptitude_Test_(SAT)_aboard_the_conventionally_powered_aircraft_carrier_USS_Kitty_Hawk_(CV_63).jpg
categories:
- portfolio
date: '2021-10-22 00:01:00'
link:
  text:
  url:
tags: 
- business-reporting
- collaboration
- deadline-breaking-news
- higher-ed-reporting
- news-writing-editing
- documentcloud
- fac-gov
- financial-statements
- irs-form-990
layout: portfolio_paywall
author: Dan Bauman and Eric Hoover
republished:
  pubname: The Chronicle of Higher Education
  puburl: https://www.chronicle.com/article/americas-standardized-testing-giants-are-losing-money-fast
  reason: Paywall
  archiveurl: "/assets/media/archive/americas-standardized-testing-giants-are-losing-money-fast.pdf"
---

<p style="color:black">A new financial filing from the nonprofit that runs one of America’s most prominent standardized tests paints a grim picture of the organization’s finances.</p>

<p style="color:black">The revenues generated by ACT Inc. from educational assessment and work-force development — a category that includes the ACT exam — declined by nearly $100 million during just the fiscal year that ended on August 31, 2020.</p>

<p style="color:black">The fallout was even starker at the College Board, where net program service-fee revenues — including what it earns from overseeing the SAT — in calendar year 2020 fell by $286 million compared to 2019. The organization warned in its financial statements that Covid-19’s effect on its bottom line could run the gamut from “a decline in revenues, an increase in operating costs, and/or potential future liquidity concerns.”</p><br>

<iframe src="https://embed.documentcloud.org/documents/21090801-college-board-report/?embed=1&amp;responsive=1&amp;title=1" title="College Board report (Hosted by DocumentCloud)" width="100%" height="530"></iframe><br>

<p style="color:black">The revenue losses come during a time of upheaval in the standardized-testing industry. The pandemic has prompted hundreds of colleges to suspend, at least temporarily, their ACT and SAT requirements, and many appear unlikely to reinstate them.</p>

<p style="color:black">In a move that still reverberates throughout higher education, the University of California’s Board of Regents <a class="Link" href="https://www.chronicle.com/article/golden-state-blockbuster-u-of-california-will-replace-act-and-sat-with-new-test-or-none-at-all" data-cms-ai="0">voted unanimously</a> in 2020 to stop using those exams altogether in evaluations of applicants. A UC faculty committee recommended this month that the system should not adopt an alternative exam called Smarter Balanced to replace the ACT and SAT. The committee wrote in a report that the exam would reduce the admission rates for Black, Hispanic, and low-income applicants while providing “modest incremental value” in predicting first-year grades at UC.</p>

<p style="color:black">Though it would be premature to say that college-entrance tests are fading away, their grip on higher education is weakening, which will continue to affect the bottom line of two testing titans.</p>

<p style="color:black">In a statement to <i>The Chronicle</i>, Curt D. Yedlik, ACT’s chief financial officer, wrote that prior to the pandemic, ACT completed a series of investments and acquisitions important to the organization’s long-term future. And when the pandemic hit, ACT sought to ensure the safety of students, educators, and personnel, including by canceling test dates.</p>

<p style="color:black">“These steps were prudent and necessary, despite the effects for ACT’s bottom line,” Yedlik wrote.</p>

<p style="color:black">Before ACT posted an overall loss of $60 million in fiscal year 2020, it had disclosed a $34-million loss a year before. Between fiscal years 2011-18, ACT never posted an overall loss of greater than $4 million.</p><br>

<iframe src="https://embed.documentcloud.org/documents/21090753-2019-form-990-act-inc/?embed=1&amp;responsive=1&amp;title=1" title="2019 Form 990, Act, Inc (Hosted by DocumentCloud)" width="100%" height="530"></iframe><br>

<p style="color:black">In late May of 2020, <i>The</i> <i>Gazette</i> of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, <a class="Link" href="https://www.thegazette.com/business/act-to-set-voluntary-resignations-future-cost-cutting-measures-loom/" target="_blank" rel="noopener" data-cms-ai="0">reported</a> ACT Inc. would implement a series of cost-cutting measures at the organization. The suite of publicized actions included voluntary resignations, temporary pay-raise suspensions, and a reduction of certain fringe benefits.</p>

<p style="color:black">ACT Inc. also agreed in 2020 to pay $16 million to California students with disabilities as part of a class-action settlement.</p>

<p style="color:black">College Board did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Friday afternoon.</p>